Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
talking about a particularly gruesome
phase of American history, a period
that caused panic and paranoia across
the country, and even changed the
way Americans lived their lives.
A seemingly nonstop series of murders
that could, and likely would have,
continued if not for advances in
technology and crime scene investigation.
Yes, today we are going to be
talking about the thirty or so year
period between the 1970s and the
2000s - the so-called “Golden Age” of
serial killers in the United States.
This episode does come with a “parental
guidance” warning, a warning that we
are going to be talking about some
nasty people who did nasty things, so
if you don’t want to listen to that,
well, I’d suggest you press pause now.
So, let's get right into it
and talk about the golden age
of the American serial killer.
It was August 1985 in east Los Angeles.
For the last year, the city had
been terrorised by a serial killer
known as the ‘Night Stalker.’
The Night Stalker randomly picked
houses to break in to, and raped,
shot, strangled, stabbed, bludgeoned
and mutilated women to death after
killing any men in the house.
He even cut out one of his
victim’s eyes, and sometimes carved
satanic symbols into the body.
Understandably, the city was gripped
by fear, but by August of 1985 the
police were hot on the Night Stalker’s
trail - that's to say, they were
getting closer to catching him.
Police were pretty sure they had
their man, and the newspapers
finally had a name and photograph
of the suspect: Richard Ramirez.
On the morning of August the 31st,
Ramirez, who was unaware that his
face was on the front cover of
almost every newspaper in the United
States, went into a liquor store.
He picked up a newspaper, and was shocked
to see his own face staring back at him
with the headline: The Night Invader.
Slowly, the other
shoppers noticed Ramirez.
They looked down at the newspapers,
and looked up at Ramirez, to see the
very same face looking back at them.
“It’s the killer!” someone screamed.
Richard Ramirez - the Night
Stalker - had been identified.
He ran out of the store in a panic,
sprinting across the passing traffic.
As he tried to carjack a woman on
the Santa Ana Freeway, Ramirez was
attacked by the lady’s husband.
He escaped into a residential
neighbourhood, where a
group began to chase him.
“ It’s the killer!” people shouted.
More and more people gave chase,
the crowd building in size.
One of them hit Ramirez over the head with
a metal bar, and he fell to the ground.
They beat him, kicking and
stamping on him, and the crowd
grew to several hundred people.
Trying to protect himself, he
shouted in Spanish: “It’s me!
It’s me!
I’m lucky the cops caught me.”
The police were called to the scene.
When they arrived Ramirez was severely
beaten and bleeding, and if the
police officers had arrived just a few
minutes later, it’s likely the crowd
would have beaten the man to death.
After a year of terror, the
Night Stalker had been caught.
But he was just one of many
during what has been called the
Golden Age of serial killers.
Now, some background.
Serial killers are, according to
the FBI, killers who commit ‘a
series of three or more killings’.
As such, the FBI estimates that less than
1 percent of all murders in the United
States are committed by serial killers.
They might feature frequently on the
news, or in movies, but the reality
is that most murders are committed
by people the victim knows, sadly,
friends or family, and more than 90%
of these murders are committed by men.
The term itself - "serial
killer" - was only coined, it
was created, in the early 1980s.
Serial killers have always existed,
of course, and there are many gruesome
examples of people who’ve murdered three
or more people from throughout history.
You might already know about Jack the
Ripper, or perhaps you’ve listened
to Episode number 30, where we
looked at his grisly life and crimes.
But there had never, and have never,
been as many serial killers operating
in the same place at the same time
as there were in the United States
between the 1970s and the 2000s.
Indeed, criminal experts believe
that more than 80 percent of all
known American serial killers
operated between 1970 and 1999.
And how many did this 80% actually
equate to, you might be wondering?
Well, it's thought that as many
as 770 active serial killers
were operating in the U.S.
in the 1980s, and just
under 670 in the 1990s.
That figure fell to below 400
in the 2000s and, as of late
2016, thankfully just over 100.
I don’t think the idea of having 100
serial killers on the loose makes anyone
particularly comfortable, but at least
it’s better than almost a thousand.
So, in this episode, we’ll look at
why there were so many of them, or
at least, some of the theories about
why this was, and look at some of
the worst serial killers of the era.
Now, assuming that you are not
a serial killer, it might seem
inconceivable, completely impossible
to understand, why someone would
decide to go on a killing spree.
So, before we get into some of the
stories of the killers themselves,
let’s look briefly at some of the
theories that would cause these men, and
it’s almost exclusively men, to kill.
Experts believe that serial killers
develop a murderous personality and
compulsion long before they start
killing, often during their childhoods.
By the time they’re 14, this murderous
compulsion is fully-formed, fully
developed, but most will only
start killing in their twenties.
So, if the psychological damage occurs
in childhood and makes serial killers the
way they are, what was going on in America
when killers like Jeffrey Dahmer, John
Wayne Gacy and Ted Bundy were children?
There is a simple answer, perhaps: war.
In cases like Dennis Rader, who was known
as the BTK killer and killed 10 people
in Kansas in the 1970s and 1980s, as well
as the Torso Killer, Richard Cottingham,
a man who killed 12 women and girls in
New York and New Jersey in the 1960s and
1970s, their fathers were soldiers who
returned from the Second World War with
PTSD - post traumatic stress disorder.
These boys, who would go on to become
serial killers grew up in violent,
abusive or unstable households,
often with traumatised fathers.
And in some cases the violent horrors of
war could have also helped create serial
killers in another, more direct way.
Whereas some killers grew up with former
soldiers for fathers and inherited their
trauma, some younger serial killers
also saw combat themselves, in Korea
and Vietnam, and returned home with a
murderous impulse they couldn’t turn off.
There are countless Vietnam veterans
who went on to become serial killers,
including, just to name two, Joseph
James DeAngelo, who was known as
the Golden State killer, and Gary
Ridgway, the Green River Killer.
In addition to this, experts also
believe that head injuries in
childhood can make it more likely.
Richard Ramirez, for example, the
man who we heard being captured at
the start of the episode, suffered a
frontal lobe injury as a two-year-old
when he fell from a chest of drawers.
Medical experts and psychologists now
understand that head injuries, and
frontal lobe injuries in particular,
can cause serious behavioural problems
such as ‘injury-induced psychopathy'.
For that reason, frontal lobe injuries
are quite common in the childhood
backgrounds of serial killers
from this so-called Golden Age.
So, these are some explanations for
why experts believe people might
develop the motivation to kill.
There are also a few changes in
American society that made it much
easier for these serial killers to
kill and keep on killing, for them
to evade capture from the police.
Firstly, in the 1960s and 1970s, as
perhaps you may even remember from
your own childhood, society tended
to be a lot more open and trusting.
It was common for people in the American
suburbs and smaller towns to leave their
doors unlocked overnight, something that
might seem unthinkable to you or me today.
The world of security systems and
street-facing cameras was decades away,
and breaking into homes and literally
getting away with murder was much easier.
Secondly, hitchhiking, that is, travelling
around by asking strangers for a lift,
in their car, usually by standing
on the side of the road with your
thumb out, was also much more common.
Many of the most murderous men of the
Golden Age preyed on, or targeted,
innocent hitchhikers, not only because
they knew that it was unlikely anybody
else knew where the hitchhikers were
headed but also because luring them into
their cars was relatively straightforward.
And still on the subject of the
roads, the development of America’s
interstate highway system gave killers
a wider geographical area to roam and
kill, and crucially, made it easier
to disappear into the next state
and between legal jurisdictions.
Another explanation for the
Golden Age is to do with law
enforcement, with the police.
In this period, police forces
didn’t have the national computer
systems and databases that could
help them link crimes together
and develop patterns of behaviour.
Similarly, at the crime scenes themselves,
police forces were fighting an uphill
battle, the odds were against them,
because DNA technology was incredibly
new and wasn’t even used for forensic
crime purposes until the mid-1980s.
And there was another important
societal reason, one that provided easy
victims for serial killers to prey on.
People were moving around the
country more than ever before,
whether this was looking for work,
new starts or anything in between.
As such, it was much more common to find
single men and women who would move into
a new community without knowing anyone,
without anyone who would check up on
them if they went missing, or didn't
come back home at night, which made them
ideal targets to be taken advantage of,
by these bloodthirsty serial killers.
So, who were these people, these
800 or so known serial killers?
Well, two of the most famous
and most notorious were Ted
Bundy and John Wayne Gacy.
In recent years these two killers have
gained particular notoriety because
their crimes and stories have captivated
audiences in dramas and podcasts, so
these are the two we’ll focus on now.
The first is Ted Bundy, a man who was a
little different to most serial killers.
He was university educated, known to be
charming, well-dressed, and handsome.
But behind the smooth persona was an
incredibly cold and calculating man who
often pretended to be injured in order to
gain the trust of his unsuspecting victims
- who were all young, attractive women.
Bundy then used his charm to ask for help
with something, such as carrying things
to his car, before attacking, handcuffing
and pushing them into the vehicle.
He even removed the passenger
seat so he could hide them
more easily when driving away.
Between 1974 and 1978, Bundy murdered
at least 30 women in this way but
as more and more of his victims were
discovered, people began suspecting him.
He was reported to the police but the
officers, who were given the very best
of Bundy’s charm and manipulation,
saw a well-dressed young man and
repeatedly ruled him out as a suspect,
they didn't believe it was him.
That was until 1975, when he was stopped
by police and found with handcuffs,
rope, masks and a crowbar in his car.
The serial killer’s
starter kit, if you will.
In 1977 police charged Bundy with
murder and he defended himself in
court - meaning, he was his own lawyer.
He even escaped from custody twice, and
continued killing until he was finally
caught again in February of 1978 after
being pulled over for a traffic violation.
He was sentenced to death and eventually
executed by electric chair in 1989.
As to why he did it, well some people
- including Bundy himself - have suggested
that his murderous impulses began when
he was rejected by a college girlfriend.
Indeed, many of his victims fit a
particular profile - young, attractive,
white, college-aged women who looked
like the woman who rejected him.
Similarly to how Bundy used his charm
to disarm people, the next killer,
John Wayne Gacy, also had a way of
putting people at ease - in a rather
creepy, nightmarish way, in fact.
In public, Gacy was thought
of as a friendly man.
He even dressed up as a clown to entertain
local children at birthday parties.
He was a respected and well-liked member
of his community, but behind closed
doors, in secret, Gacy was a truly
vile individual, he was a monster.
He raped and murdered at least
33 young men and boys and buried
most of them beneath his house.
Often, Gacy would lure his victims to
the house before tricking them into
wearing handcuffs as part of his clown
routine - claiming it was part of a
magic trick - before he killed them.
Fortunately, however, the police
eventually caught up with him.
Gacy was arrested in 1978, and claimed
he was legally insane in order to
try to avoid the death penalty.
It didn’t work, and after a decade
on death row - where they keep
prisoners who are waiting to be
executed - in May of 1994 Gacy
was executed by lethal injection.
By then the horrors of his crimes
had become well-known, as had
his former role in the community,
which led to the nightmarish
nickname of the ‘Clown Killer’.
Experts believe that Gacy displayed
behaviour consistent with antisocial
personality disorder, a condition that
can be triggered by childhood abuse,
which was something Gacy suffered at the
hands of his alcoholic war veteran father.
True to form, he never showed
any remorse for his crimes.
Now, Bundy and Gacy are just a handful
of examples of hundreds of serial killers
during this so-called Golden Age, and
I have actually spared you the worst
of the details about their vile acts.
Fortunately, the particular set
of conditions, or circumstances,
that allowed them to flourish
during this Golden Age is no more.
Firstly, the era of an entire
generation of men returning from
traumatic wars is over, and there
are better safety nets in place to
catch children who might be growing
up in abusive or traumatic households.
So, at least in theory, there
will be fewer children who grow up
wanting to commit these vile acts.
And secondly, much of Western society at
least is much less trusting of strangers.
People lock their doors at night and
don’t accept lifts from strange men.
Of course, there are some
disadvantages to this, but making
life harder for potential serial
killers certainly isn’t one of them.
What’s more, law enforcement is simply
much better at catching criminals.
Modern technology and crime
scene investigation techniques
mean that it’s now harder than
ever to get away with murder.
Unfortunately, history suggests that there
will always be damaged people who make up
their minds and decide that the only way
to fulfil some warped desire is through
ending the life of an innocent stranger.
And it seems that never before have
there been more of these people wandering
the streets than in 1970s America.
Thankfully, this era, this “Golden Age” of
the American serial killer, is long gone,
these bloody three decades of history
are behind us, and one can only hope
it’s a chapter never to be opened again.
Ok then, that is it for today’s
episode on the “Golden Age”
of the American serial killer.
A bit of a gruesome topic, I know.
I hope it was an interesting one in
any case, and whether you’re a True
Crime aficionado and you knew a lot
about serial killers already, or this
was the first time you’d heard anything
about this so-called “Golden Era”,
well I hope you learned something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Which of the reasons do you think
best explains the Golden Age?
Do you think this is an era that
will truly never be repeated?
Are there any gruesome tales of
serial killers from your country?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other  curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.